## Summary
Effective two-way communication between KBase and users (both current and potential future users) is critical to meeting user needs in order to grow and retain our active user base.

## Description

The User Engagement team performs multiple roles in user testing, communications, training, documentation, and support.
The team coordinates the collection and distillation of feedback gathered via user testing, questionnaires, Help Desk, and other sources; writes and disseminates user documentation via the kbase.us website; produces training materials and events; uses social media to raise awareness about the project; runs the Help Desk; collects metrics about system usage and performance for periodic reports; and reports plans and roadmaps to our stakeholders.

This Product Description summarizes the scope of work performed by the UE team. Some tasks also have more detailed PDs, as indicated.

### User Documentation
Types of documentation generated and/or edited and updated by the team include:
* User guides
* App tutorials (increasingly in the form of Narratives)
* Science Narratives (generated by scientists; edited by UE).
* Instructional videos
* Method detail pages (generated by developers; edited by UE).
* Explanatory text in Narrative Interface (e.g., in upload screens)
* FAQs (based on questions asked via Help Desk, workshops, etc.)
* Materials for workshops and conferences: brochures, posters, slides, handouts

### Website
The team is responsible for creating, updating and maintaining the kbase.us website, which is a key communication channel for reaching new and returning users. We periodically revise the website, based on changing project priorities and features, user feedback, and new advances and trends in web design. We plan to undertake such a redesign in 2016 Q3, based primarily on feedback from new users (see PD).

### User Support
The User Engagement team runs the [Help Desk](https://atlassian.kbase.us/secure/Dashboard.jspa?selectPageId=10603), which tracks and responds to user questions and bug reports. Users are always contacted within one work day to let them know we received their query or suggestion, and the bug report or feature request is prioritized based on current project plans and staffing. The Help Desk works closely with the documentation team to improve documentation whenever users seem to find it confusing or unenlightening. The tangible product produced by the Help Desk is a monthly report summarizing the top user complaints and suggestions for input into future planning. 

In Q3, we will begin setting up and testing (internally and with a few beta testers)  a User Forum (see PD). Ultimately, the User Forum should reduce the burden on internal developers and scientists of answering user questions, as users will begin to help each other. Initially, however, the success of the User Forum will depend upon the responsiveness of KBase scientists and developers.

### Reporting
The UE team generates or edits many types of reports and communications, including:
* Social media posts (blog posts, tweets, user testimonials, etc.)
* Quarterly newsletter
* Reports to DOE (quarterly and annual)
* Usage and Help Desk reports to management

UE reviews and edits all external communications, including abstracts for conferences, posters, slides, science Narratives, Narrative tutorials, journal articles, book chapters, etc.)
* KBase paper--the UE team expects to devote considerable effort in 2016Q3 to editing the KBase paper.

### Training events, meetings, workshops, webinars
(See Events PD)
KBase talks, workshops, booths and training events are an important way to reach current and potential users and open their eyes to the benefits of using KBase. Since the beginning of the project, KBase has been presented at more than 70 conferences and meetings, including two annual KBase User Meetings (held in conjunction with the JGI User Meeting) and an "Experience Room" at the annual DOE Genome Science Program meeting. Since the first release of the SDK in February 2016, UE has begun helping to organize SDK training workshops; in the future, there will be SDK hackathons to bring together outside developers who want help adding new functionality to KBase.

These events not only let us spread the word about KBase (after each KBase event, we have observed an uptick in new user accounts); they are also a key source of user feedback. Over [NUMBER] attendees at recent workshops provided feedback about what they liked and didn't like about KBase, and new functionality they'd like us to add, in the form of written questionnaires and conversations with the workshop leaders.

In Q3, we plan to begin presenting webinars to train both beginning and more advanced users in how to use KBase tools, data and interfaces (see Webinars PD).

### QA/Testing
The UE team conducts internal usability testing on new UI features, apps and tutorials, as well as coordinating external testing (see User Testing PD).

Feedback obtained from user training and testing is processed and summarized to help inform future prioritization of fixes and additions to the system.


## User Stories

Susan Biologist visits the kbase.us home page to determine whether KBase will be useful to her.

Systems Biologist Teresa scans social media such as Twitter to find out about resources to try out.

Beverly Bioinformaticist wants to know what approaches KBase uses to model plant/microbe metabolic interactions.

JGI user Janice learns about KBase at the annual User Meeting and fills out a KBase questionnaire to let us know what she finds confusing about KBase and which tools and data she hopes we'll add.

User Jose can't upload his data file to KBase, and wants help.

New user Ed learns by watching, and wants to see a video tutorial that shows how to use KBase to analyze data.

User Samir learns by doing. He copies some of the Narrative tutorials and tries running them on his data and tweaking the parameters.

User Tien wants to find out how to share Narratives with her collaborators. She searches kbase.us for the answer.

Metabolic modeling expert Abdullah wants to know how media data is structured in KBase. He finds the answer in the Metabolic Modeling FAQ.

KBase product owner Melissa wants to know what users are saying about her team's product.

Biologist Carlos hears about KBase and wants to learn more about what it is and how to use it. He signs up for an “Intro to KBase” webinar.

Bioinformatics developer Ned is interested in integrating his new analysis tool into KBase. He attends an SDK workshop to learn how to do this.

DOE Program Manager Ramana wants to know what KBase has accomplished in the last quarter and what our plans are for the next quarter.

## Timeline
Most UE activities are ongoing, though there tend to be periods of intense effort on particular products/activities. For example, just prior to a major release, the team is busy testing new apps and writing or editing tutorials. Some UE activities are scheduled to prepare for workshops or meetings (see Events PD). Minor updates to the kbase.us website happen frequently, while major redesigns happen only once every year or two.
